---
title: "Unit 9 Section A"
---

# Mobile and Cloud Computing

## I. Introduction

Cloud computing has been defined differently by many users and
designers. IBM, a major player in cloud computing, has defined it as
follows: *"A cloud is a pool of virtualized computer resources. A cloud
can host a variety of different workloads, including batch-style
backend jobs and interactive and user-facing applications."*

The concept of cloud computing has evolved from cluster, grid, and
utility computing. Cluster and grid computing **leverage** the use of
many computers in parallel to solve problems of any size. Utility and
Software as a Service (SaaS) provide computing resources as a service
with the **notion** of pay per use. Cloud computing leverages dynamic
resources to deliver large numbers of services to end users. Cloud
computing is a high-throughput computing (HTC) **paradigm**
**whereby** the infrastructure provides the services through a large
data center or server farms. The cloud computing model enables users
to share access to resources from anywhere at any time through their
connected devices.

The cloud will free users to focus on user application development and
create business value by **outsourcing** job execution to cloud
providers. In this **scenario**, the computations (programs) are sent
to where the data is located, rather than copying the data millions of
desktops as in the traditional approach. Cloud computing avoids large
data movement, resulting in much better network bandwidth utilization.
Furthermore, machine virtualization has enhanced resource utilization,
increased application flexibility, and reduced the total cost of using
virtualized data-center resources.

The cloud offers significant benefit to IT companies by freeing them
from the low-level task of setting up the hardware (servers) and
managing the system software. Cloud computing applies a virtual
platform with **elastic** resources put together by on-demand
**provisioning** of hardware, software, and data sets, dynamically.
The main idea is to move desktop computing to a service-oriented
platform using server clusters and huge databases at data centers.
Cloud computing leverages its low cost and simplicity to benefit both
providers and users. Cloud computing intends to leverage multitasking
to archive higher throughput by serving many **heterogeneous**
applications, large or small, simultaneously.

## II. Public, Private, and Hybrid Clouds

A *public cloud* is built over the Internet and can be accessed by any
user who paid for the service. Public clouds are owned by service
providers and are accessible through a **subscription**. The **callout
box** in top of Figure 1 shows the architecture of a typical public
cloud. Many public clouds are available, including Google App Engine
(GAE), Amazon Web Services (AWS), Microsoft Azure, IBM Blue Cloud, and
Salesforce.com's Force.com. The providers of the **aforementioned**
clouds are commercial providers that offer a publicly accessible
remote interface for creating and managing VM instances within their
**proprietary** infrastructure. A public cloud delivers a selected set
of business processes. The application and infrastructure services are
offered on a flexible price-per-use basis.

![Public, private, and hybrid clouds illustrated by functional
architecture and connectivity of representative clouds](./9A-1.png)

A *private cloud* is built within the domain of an intranet owned by a
single organization. Therefore, it is client owned and managed, and
its access is limited to the owning clients and their partners. Its
deployment was not meant to sell capacity over the Internet through
publicly accessible interfaces. Private clouds give local users a
flexible and **agile** private infrastructure to run service workloads
within their administrative domains. A private cloud is supposed to
deliver more efficient and convenient cloud services. It may impact
the cloud standardization, while retaining greater customization and
organizational control. Intranet-based private clouds are linked to
public clouds to get additional resources.

A *hybrid cloud* is built with both public and private clouds, as
shown at the lower-left corner of Figure 1. Private clouds can also
support a hybrid cloud model by supplementing local infrastructure
with computing capacity from an external public cloud. For example,
the Research Compute Cloud (RC2) is a private cloud, build by IBM,
that interconnects the computing and IT resources at eight IBM
Research Centers **scattered** throughout the United States, Europe,
and Asia. A hybrid cloud provides access to clients, the partner
network, and third parties.

In summary, public clouds promote standardization, preserve capital
investment, and offer application flexibility. Private clouds attempt
to archive customization and offer higher efficiency, **resiliency**,
security, and privacy. Hybrid clouds operate in the middle, with many
**compromises** in terms of resource sharing.

## III. Cloud Design Objectives

Despite the **controversy** surrounding the replacement of desktop or
**deskside** computing by centralized computing and storage services
at data centers or big IT companies, the cloud computing community has
reached some consensus on what has to be done to make cloud computing
universally acceptable. The following list highlights six design
objectives for cloud computing:

* **Shifting computing from desktops to data centers:** Computer
  processing, storage, and software delivery is shifted away from
  desktops and local servers and toward data centers over the
  Internet.
* **Service provisioning and cloud economics:** Providers supply cloud
  services by signing service-level agreements (SLAs) with consumers
  and end users. The services must be efficient in terms of computing,
  storage, and power consumption. Pricing is based on a pay-as-you-go
  policy.
* **Scalability in performance:** The cloud platforms and software and
  infrastructure services must be able to scale in performance as the
  number of users increases.

... to be continued ...
